CHAPTER 2
Units and groupings of units
2.01 The economy of a country is a system whereby
institutions and people interact through exchanges
and transfers of goods, services and means of payment (e.g. money) for the production and consumption of goods and services.
In the economy, the units interacting are economic
entities that are capable of owning assets, incurring
liabilities and engaging in economic activities and
in transactions with other entities. They are known
as institutional units.
Defining the units used in national accounts serves
various purposes. First, units are the essential building blocks in defining economies in geographical
terms, e.g. nations, regions, and nation groupings
such as monetary or political unions. Second, they
are the essential building blocks for grouping units
into institutional sectors. Third, they are essential
for defining which flows and stocks are recorded.
Transactions between various parts of the same
institutional unit are, in principle, not recorded in
the national accounts.
2.02 The units and groupings of units used in national
accounts shall be defined with reference to the
kind of economic analysis for which they are
intended, and not in terms of the types of unit usually employed in statistical inquiries. The latter
units (e.g. enterprises, holding companies, kindof-activity units, local units, government departments, non-profit institutions, households, etc.)
may not be satisfactory for the purposes of national
accounts, since they are based on criteria of a legal,
administrative or accounting nature.
Statisticians shall take into account the definitions
of units of analysis as laid down in the ESA 2010,
in order to ensure that, in the surveys in which
data are collected, all the elements of information
needed to compile data based on the units of analysis used in the ESA 2010 are gradually introduced.
2.03 A feature of the ESA 2010 system is the use of types
of unit corresponding to three ways of subdividing
the economy:
((1) to analyse flows and positions, it is essential
to select units which make it possible to study
behavioural relationships among economic
agents;
((2) to analyse the process of production, it is essential to select units that bring out relationships
of a technico-economic nature, or that reflect
local activities;
((3) to allow regional analyses, units that reflect
local kinds of activity are needed.
Institutional units are defined to meet the first
of these objectives. Behavioural relationships, as
described in point (1), require units reflecting all of
their institutional economic activity.
The production processes, technico-economic
relationships and regional analyses referred to in
points (2) and (3) require units such as local KAUs.
These units are described later in this chapter.
Before giving definitions of the units used in the
ESA 2010, it is necessary to define the limits of the
national economy.
The limits of the national economy
2.04 The units which constitute the economy of a country and whose flows and stocks are recorded in the
ESA 2010 are those which are resident. An institutional unit is resident in a country when it has
its centre of predominant economic interest in the
economic territory of that country. Such units are
known as resident units, irrespective of nationality,
legal form or presence on the economic territory at
the time they carry out a transaction.
2.05 Economic territory consists of the following:
2 Units and groupings of units
26 European system of accounts — ESA 2010
(a) the area (geographic territory) under the effective administration and economic control of a
single government;
(b) any free zones, including bonded warehouses
and factories under customs control;
(c) the national air-space, territorial waters and the
continental shelf lying in international waters,
over which the country enjoys exclusive rights;
(d) territorial enclaves, these being geographic territories situated in the rest of the world and
used, under international treaties or agreements between states, by general government
agencies of the country (such as embassies,
consulates, military bases, scientific bases, etc.);
(e) deposits of oil, natural gas, etc. in international
waters outside the continental shelf of the
country, worked by units resident in the territory as defined in points (a) to (d).
Fishing boats, other ships, floating platforms and
aircraft are treated in the ESA as mobile equipment,
whether owned and/or operated by units resident
in the country, or owned by non-residents and
operated by resident units. Transactions involving the ownership (gross fixed capital formation)
and use (renting, insurance, etc.) of mobile equipment are attributed to the economy of the country
of which the owner and/or operator respectively
are residents. In cases of financial leasing, a change
of ownership is assumed.
Economic territory may be an area larger or smaller
than that defined above. An example of a larger
area is a currency union such as the European
Monetary Union; an example of a smaller area is a
part of a country such as a region.
2.06 Economic territory excludes extraterritorial
enclaves.
Also excluded are the parts of the country’s
own geographic territory used by the following
organisations:
(a) general government agencies of other countries;
(b) institutions and bodies of the European Union;
and
(c) international organisations under international
treaties between states.
The territories used by the institutions and bodies
of the European Union and international organisations are separate economic territories. A feature
of such territories is that the only residents are the
institutions.
2.07 Centre of predominant economic interest indicates that a location exists within the economic territory of a country where a unit engages in economic activities and transactions on a significant
scale, either indefinitely or over a finite but long
period of time (a year or more). The ownership of
land and buildings within the economic territory is
deemed to be sufficient for the owner to have a centre of predominant economic interest there.
Enterprises are almost always connected to only a
single economy. Taxation and other legal requirements tend to result in the use of a separate legal
entity for operations in each legal jurisdiction. In
addition, a separate institutional unit is identified
for statistical purposes where a single legal entity
has substantial operations in two or more territories (e.g. for branches, land ownership, and multiterritory enterprises). As a result of splitting such
legal entities, the residence of each of the subsequently identified enterprises is clear. Centre of
predominant economic interest does not mean
that entities with substantial operations in two or
more territories should not be split.
In the absence of any physical dimension to an
enterprise, its residence is determined according to
the economic territory under whose laws the enterprise is incorporated or registered.
2.08 Units deemed to be residents of a country can be
subdivided into:
(a) units that are engaged in production, finance,
insurance or redistribution, in respect of all
their transactions except those relating to ownership of land and buildings;
(b) units which are principally engaged in consumption, in respect of all their transactions
except those relating to ownership of land and
buildings;
Units and groupings of units
 European system of accounts — ESA 2010 27
2
(c) all units in their capacity as owners of land and
buildings with the exception of owners of extraterritorial enclaves which are part of the economic territory of other countries or are independent states.
2.09 For units other than households, in respect of all
their transactions except those relating to ownership of land and buildings, the following two cases
may be distinguished:
(a) activity is conducted exclusively on the economic territory of the country: units which
carry out such activity are resident units of the
country;
(b) activity is conducted for a year or more on the
economic territories of several countries: only
that part of the unit that has a centre of predominant economic interest in the economic
territory of the country is deemed to be a resident unit of that country.
A resident institutional unit may be a notional resident unit, in respect of the activity conducted in the
country for a year or more by a unit which is resident in another country. When the activity is carried on for less than a year, the activity remains part
of the activities of the producer institutional unit
and no separate institutional unit is recognised.
When the activity is insignificant, even though lasting longer than a year, and for the installation of
equipment abroad, no separate unit is recognised
and the activities are recorded as that of the producing institutional unit.
2.10 Households, except in their capacity as owners of
land and buildings, are resident units of the economic territory where they have a centre of predominant economic interest. They are resident
irrespective of periods spent abroad of less than
one year. They shall include, in particular, the
following:
(a) border workers, defined as people who cross
the frontier daily to work in a neighbouring
country;
(b) seasonal workers, defined as people who leave
the country for several months according to
season, but less than a year, to work in another
country;
(c) tourists, patients, students, visiting officials,
businessmen, salesmen, artists and crew members who travel abroad;
(d) locally recruited staff working in the extraterritorial enclaves of foreign governments;
(e) the staff of the institutions of the European
Union and of civilian or military international
organisations which have their headquarters in
extraterritorial enclaves;
(f) the official, civilian or military representatives of the government of the country (including their households) established in territorial
enclaves.
Students are always treated as residents, irrespective of the length of their studies abroad.
2.11 All units, in their capacity as owners of land and/or
buildings forming part of the economic territory,
are resident units or notional resident units of the
country in which that land or those buildings in
question are located.
The institutional units
2.12 Definition: an institutional unit is an economic
entity characterised by decision-making autonomy
in the exercise of its principal function. A resident
unit is regarded as constituting an institutional
unit in the economic territory where it has its centre of predominant economic interest if it has decision-making autonomy and either keeps a complete set of accounts, or is able to compile a complete set of accounts.
To have autonomy of decision in respect of its
principal function, an entity must be:
(a) entitled to own goods and assets in its own
right; it will be able to exchange the ownership
of goods and assets in transactions with other
institutional units;
(b) able to take economic decisions and engage in
economic activities for which it is responsible
and accountable at law;
(c) able to incur liabilities on its own behalf, to take
on other obligations or further commitments
and to enter into contracts; and
2 Units and groupings of units
28 European system of accounts — ESA 2010
(d) able to draw up a complete set of accounts,
comprised of accounting records covering all
its transactions carried out during the accounting period, as well as a balance sheet of assets
and liabilities.
2.13 The following principles apply whenever an entity
does not possess the characteristics of an institutional unit:
(a) households are deemed to enjoy autonomy of
decision in respect of their principal function
and are, therefore, institutional units nonetheless, even though they do not keep a complete
set of accounts;
(b) entities which do not keep a complete set of
accounts, and are not able to compile a complete set of accounts if required to do so, are not
institutional units;
(c) entities which, while keeping a complete set of
accounts, have no autonomy of decision, are
part of the units which control them;
(d) entities do not need to publish accounts to be
an institutional unit;
(e) entities forming part of a group of units
engaged in production and keeping a complete set of accounts are deemed to be institutional units even if they have partially surrendered their autonomy of decision to the central
body (the head office) responsible for the general direction of the group; the head office itself
is deemed to be an institutional unit distinct
from the units which it controls;
(f) quasi-corporations are entities which keep a
complete set of accounts and have no legal
status. They have an economic and financial
behaviour that is different from that of their
owners and similar to that of corporations.
They are deemed to have autonomy of decision and are considered as distinct institutional
units.
Head offices and holding companies
2.14 Head offices and holding companies are institutional units. The two types are:
(a) A head office is a unit that exercises managerial
control over its subsidiaries. Head offices are
allocated to the dominant non-financial corporations sector of their subsidiaries, unless all or
most of their subsidiaries are financial corporations, in which case they are treated as financial
auxiliaries (S.126) in the financial corporations
sector.
Where there is a mixture of non-financial and
financial subsidiaries, then the predominant
share-by-value-added determines the sector
classification.
Head offices are described under international
standard industrial classification of all economic activities revision (ISIC Rev. 4), Section
M, class 7010 (NACE Rev. 2, M 70.10) as
follows:
This class includes the overseeing and managing of other units of the company or enterprise; undertaking strategic or organisational
planning and decision-making role of the company or enterprise; exercising operational control and managing the day-to-day operation of
their related units.
(b) A holding company that holds the assets of subsidiary corporations but does not undertake
any management activities is a captive financial
institution (S.127) and classified as a financial
corporation.
Holding companies are described under ISIC
Rev.4, Section K, class 6420 (NACE Rev. 2, K
64.20) as follows:
This class includes the activities of holding companies, i.e. units that hold the assets (owning
controlling-levels of equity) of a group of subsidiary corporations and whose principal activity is owning the group. The holding companies
in this class do not provide any other service to
the businesses in which the equity is held, i.e.
they do not administer or manage other units.
Groups of corporations
2.15 Large groups of corporations are created when a
parent controls several subsidiaries, which may
in turn control their own subsidiaries, and so on.
Units and groupings of units
 European system of accounts — ESA 2010 29
2
Each member of the group is treated as a separate
institutional unit if it satisfies the definition of an
institutional unit.
2.16 An advantage of not treating groups of corporations as single institutional units is that groups are
not always stable over time, nor easily identifiable in practice. It can be difficult to obtain data on
groups whose activities are not closely integrated.
Many groups are too large and heterogeneous to
be treated as single units, and their size and composition can change over time as a result of mergers and takeovers.
Special purpose entities
2.17 A special purpose entity (SPE) or special purpose
vehicle (SPV) is usually a limited company or a
limited partnership, created to fulfil narrow, specific or temporary objectives and to isolate a financial risk, a specific taxation or a regulatory risk.
2.18 There is no common definition of an SPE, but the
following characteristics are typical:
(a) they have no employees and no non-financial
assets;
(b) they have little physical presence beyond a
‘brass plate’ or sign confirming their place of
registration;
(c) they are always related to another corporation,
often as a subsidiary;
(d) they are resident in a different territory from
the territory of residence of the related corporations. In the absence of any physical presence
an enterprise’s residence is determined according to the economic territory under whose laws
the enterprise is incorporated or registered;
(e) they are managed by employees of another corporation which may or may not be a related
one. The SPE pays fees for services provided to
it and in turn charges its parent or other related
corporation a fee to cover those costs. This is
the only production the SPE is involved in,
although it will often incur liabilities on behalf
of its owner and will usually receive investment
income and holding gains on the assets it holds.
2.19 Whether a unit has all or none of these characteristics, and whether it is described as an SPE or some
similar designation or not, it shall be treated in the
same way as any other institutional unit by being
allocated to sector and industry according to its
principal activity unless the SPE has no independent rights of action.
2.20 So captive financial institutions, artificial subsidiaries and special purpose units of general government with no independence of action are allocated
to the sector of their controlling body. The exception occurs when they are non-resident, in which
case they are recognised separately from their controlling body. But in the case of government, the
activities of the subsidiary shall be reflected in the
government accounts.
Captive financial institutions
2.21 A holding company that simply owns the assets of
subsidiaries is one example of a captive financial
institution. Examples of other units that are also
treated as captive financial institutions are units
with the characteristics of SPEs as described above,
including investment and pension funds and units
used for holding and managing wealth for individuals or families, issuing debt securities on behalf
of related companies (such a company may be
called a conduit), and carrying out other financial
functions.
2.22 The degree of independence from its parent may
be demonstrated by exercising some substantive
control over its assets and liabilities to the extent
of carrying the risks and reaping the rewards associated with the assets and liabilities. Such units are
classified in the financial corporations sector.
2.23 An entity of this type that cannot act independently of its parent and is simply a passive holder of
assets and liabilities (sometimes described as being
on autopilot) is not treated as a separate institutional unit unless it is resident in an economy different from that of its parent. If it is resident in the
same economy as its parent, it is treated as an ‘artificial subsidiary’ as described below.
2 Units and groupings of units
30 European system of accounts — ESA 2010
Artificial subsidiaries
2.24 A subsidiary, wholly owned by a parent corporation, may be created to provide services to the parent corporation, or other corporations in the same
group, in order to avoid taxes, to minimise liabilities in the event of bankruptcy, or to secure other
technical advantages under the tax or corporation
legislation in force in a particular country.
2.25 In general, such types of entities do not satisfy the
definition of an institutional unit because they lack
the ability to act independently from their parent corporation and may be subject to restrictions
on their ability to hold or transact assets held on
their balance sheets. Their level of output and the
price they receive for it are determined by the parent that (possibly with other corporations in the
same group) is their sole client. They are, thus,
not treated as separate institutional units, but are
treated as an integral part of the parent, and their
accounts are consolidated with those of the parent,
unless they are resident in an economic territory
different from that where the parent is resident.
2.26 A distinction must be made between artificial subsidiaries as just described and a unit undertaking
only ancillary activities. Ancillary activities are limited in scope to the type of service functions that
virtually all enterprises need to some extent or
another such as cleaning premises, running the
staff payroll or providing the information technology infrastructure for the enterprise (see Chapter 1,
paragraph 1.31).
Special purpose units of general
government
2.27 General government may also set up special purpose units, with characteristics and functions similar to the captive financial institutions and artificial
subsidiaries. Such units do not have the power to
act independently and are restricted in the range of
transactions they can engage in. They do not carry
the risks and rewards associated with the assets and
liabilities they hold. Such units, if they are resident,
shall be treated as an integral part of general government and not as separate units. If they are nonresident, they shall be treated as separate units.
Any transactions carried out by them abroad shall
be reflected in corresponding transactions with
government. Thus, a unit that borrows abroad is
then regarded as lending the same amount to general government, and on the same terms, as the
original borrowing.
2.28 In summary, the accounts of SPEs with no independent rights of action are consolidated with the
parent corporation, unless they are resident in a
different economy from that of the parent. There is
one exception to this general rule, and that is when
a non-resident SPE is set up by government.
2.29 Notional resident units shall be defined as:
(a) those parts of non-resident units which have
a centre of predominant economic interest
(being, in most cases, units which engage in
economic production for a year or more) on
the economic territory of the country;
(b) non-resident units in their capacity as owners
of land and/or buildings on the economic territory of the country, but only in respect of transactions affecting such land or buildings.
Notional resident units, irrespective of only keeping partial accounts and irrespective of autonomy
of decision, shall be treated as institutional units.
2.30 The following shall be considered as institutional
units:
(a) units that have autonomy of decision and a
complete set of accounts such as:
(1) private and public corporations;
(2) cooperatives or partnerships recognised as independent legal entities;
(3) public producers which by virtue of special legislation are recognised as independent legal entities;
(4) non-profit institutions recognised as independent
legal entities; and
(5) agencies of general government;
(b) units which have a complete set of accounts
and which are deemed to have autonomy of
decision despite not having separate incorporation from their parent: quasi-corporations;
(c) units which do not necessarily keep a complete
set of accounts, but which are deemed to have
autonomy of decision, namely:
(1) households;
(2) notional resident units.
Units and groupings of units
 European system of accounts — ESA 2010 31
2
The institutional sectors
2.31 Macroeconomic analysis does not consider the
actions of each institutional unit separately — it
considers the aggregate activities of similar institutions. So units are combined into groups called
institutional sectors, some of which are divided
into subsectors.
2.32 Each sector and subsector groups together the
institutional units which have a similar type of economic behaviour.
Table 2.1 — Sectors and subsectors
Sectors and subsectors Public National
private
Foreign
controlled
Non-financial corporations S.11 S.11001 S.11002 S.11003
Financial corporations S.12
Monetary
financial
institutions (MFIs)
Central bank S.121
Other monetary
financial
institutions
(OMFI)
Deposit-taking corporations
except the central bank S.122 S.12201 S.12202 S.12203
Money market funds (MMFs) S.123 S.12301 S.12302 S.12303
Financial
corporations
except MFIs
and Insurance
corporations and
pension funds
(ICPFs)
Non-MMF investment funds S.124 S.12401 S.12402 S.12403
Other financial intermediaries, except insurance
corporations and pension funds S.125 S.12501 S.12502 S.12503
Financial auxiliaries S.126 S.12601 S.12602 S.12603
Captive financial institutions and money lenders S.127 S.12701 S.12702 S.12703
ICPFs Insurance corporations (IC) S.128 S.12801 S.12802 S.12803
Pension funds (PF) S.129 S.12901 S.12902 S.12903
General government S.13
Central government (excluding social security funds) S.1311
State government (excluding social security funds) S.1312
Local government (excluding social security funds) S.1313
Social security funds S.1314
Households S.14
Employers and own-account workers S.141+S.142
Employees S.143
Recipients of property and transfer income S.144
Recipients of property income S.1441
Recipients of pensions S.1442
Recipients of other transfers S.1443
Non-profit institutions serving households S.15
Rest of the world S.2
Member States and institutions and bodies of the European Union S.21
Member States of the European Union S.211
Institutions and bodies of the European Union S.212
Non-member countries and international organisations nonresident in the European Union S.22
2 Units and groupings of units
32 European system of accounts — ESA 2010
Diagram 2.1 — Allocation of units to sectors
Is the unit resident?
Is the unit a household?
Is the unit a non-market producer?
Is the unit controlled by
government?
NPISH Non-financial
corporations
Public nonfinancial
corporations
Private nonfinancial
corporations
Private
financial
corporations
Public
financial
corporations
Is the unit controlled by
general government?
General
government
Financial corporations
RoW
Households
Is the unit controlled by
general government?
Does the unit produce financial services?
No
No
No
No
No No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes Yes
Yes Yes
Yes
Units and groupings of units
 European system of accounts — ESA 2010 33
2
2.33 The institutional units are grouped into sectors
on the basis of the type of producer they are and
depending on their principal activity and function,
which are considered to be indicative of their economic behaviour.
2.34 Diagram 2.1 shows how units are allocated to the
main sectors. In order to determine the sector of a
unit which is resident and not a household, according to the diagram, it is necessary to determine
whether it is controlled by general government or
not, and whether it is a market or a non-market
producer.
2.35 Control over a financial or non-financial corporation shall be defined as the ability to determine
general corporate policy, for example by choosing
appropriate directors if necessary.
2.36 A single institutional unit (another corporation,
a household, a non-profit institution or a government unit) secures control over a corporation or
quasi-corporation by owning more than half the
voting shares or otherwise controlling more than
half the shareholders’ voting power.
2.37 In order to control more than half the shareholders’
voting power, an institutional unit need not own
any of the voting shares itself. A given corporation,
corporation C, could be a subsidiary of another
corporation B in which a third corporation A owns
a majority of the voting shares. Corporation C is
said to be subsidiary of corporation B when either
corporation B controls more than half of the shareholders’ voting power in corporation C or corporation B is a shareholder in C with the right to
appoint or remove a majority of the directors of C.
2.38 General government secures control over a corporation as a result of special legislation, decree or regulation which empowers the government to determine corporate policy. The following indicators are
the main factors to consider in deciding whether a
corporation is controlled by government:
(a) government ownership of the majority of the
voting interest;
(b) government control of the board or governing
body;
(c) government control of the appointment and
removal of key personnel;
(d) government control of key committees in the
entity;
(e) government possession of a golden share;
(f) special regulations;
(g) government as a dominant customer;
(h) borrowing from government.
A single indicator may be sufficient to establish
control, but, in other cases, a number of separate
indicators may collectively indicate control.
2.39 For non-profit institutions recognised as independent legal entities, the five indicators of control
to be considered are:
(a) the appointment of officers;
(b) the provisions of enabling instruments;
(c) contractual agreements;
(d) the degree of financing;
(e) the degree of government risk exposure.
As with corporations, a single indicator may be
sufficient to establish control in some cases, but, in
other cases, a number of separate indicators may
collectively indicate control.
2.40 Differentiating between market and non-market, and so for public sector entities classification
between the general government sector and the
corporations sector, depends on the criteria set out
in paragraph 1.37.
2.41 A sector shall be divided into subsectors according
to the criteria relevant to that sector; for example
government can be split into central, state and local
government and social security funds. This permits
a more precise description of the economic behaviour of the units.
The accounts for sectors and subsectors record all
the activities, whether principal or secondary, of
the institutional units covered by the appropriate
sector.
Each institutional unit belongs to only one sector
or subsector.
2 Units and groupings of units
34 European system of accounts — ESA 2010
2.42 When the principal function of the institutional
unit is to produce goods and services, the type of
producer must be decided first, in order to allocate
it to a sector.
2.43 Table 2.2 shows the type of producer and the principal activities and functions that are characteristic
of each sector:
Table 2.2 — Type of producer and principal activities and functions classified by sector
Type of producer Principal activity and function Sector
Market producer Production of market goods and non-financial services Non-financial corporations
(S.11)
Market producer Financial intermediation including insurance
Auxiliary financial activities Financial corporations (S.12)
Public non-market producer
Production and supply of non-market output for collective and
individual consumption, and carrying out transactions intended to
redistribute national income and wealth
General government (S.13)
Market producer or private
producer for own final use
Consumption
Production of market output and output for own final use
Households (S.14)
As consumers
As entrepreneurs
Private non-market producer Production and supply of non-market output for individual
consumption
Non-profit institutions
serving households (S.15)
2.44 The rest of the world (S.2) sector refers to flows and
positions between resident units and non-resident
units — the non-resident units are not characterised by similar objectives and types of behaviour,
but are only recognised through their flows and
positions with resident units.
Non-financial corporations (S.11)
2.45 Definition: the non-financial corporations sector (S.11) consists of institutional units which are
independent legal entities and market producers,
and whose principal activity is the production of
goods and non-financial services. The non-financial corporations sector also includes non-financial
quasi-corporations (see paragraph 2.13(f)).
2.46 The institutional units covered are the following:
(a) private and public corporations which are market producers principally engaged in the production of goods and non-financial services;
(b) cooperatives and partnerships recognised as
independent legal entities which are market
producers principally engaged in the production of goods and non-financial services;
(c) public producers which are recognised as independent legal entities and which are market
producers principally engaged in the production of goods and non-financial services;
(d) non-profit institutions or associations serving
non-financial corporations, which are recognised as independent legal entities and which
are market producers principally engaged in
the production of goods and non-financial
services;
(e) head offices controlling a group of corporations
which are market producers, where the preponderant type of activity of the group of corporations as a whole - measured on the basis of
value added — is the production of goods and
non-financial services;
(f) SPEs whose principal activity is the provision of
goods or non-financial services;
(g) private and public quasi-corporations which
are market producers principally engaged in
the production of goods and non-financial
services.
2.47 Non-financial quasi-corporations are all entities
which are market producers principally engaged in
the production of goods and non-financial services
and which meet the conditions qualifying them
as quasi-corporations (see point (f) of paragraph
2.13).
Units and groupings of units
 European system of accounts — ESA 2010 35
2
Non-financial quasi-corporations must keep
enough information to enable a complete set of
accounts to be drawn up, and are operated as if
they were corporations. The de facto relationship to their owner is that of a corporation to its
shareholders.
Non-financial quasi-corporations owned by households, government units or non-profit institutions
are grouped with non-financial corporations in the
non-financial corporations sector, and not in the
sector of their owner.
2.48 The existence of a complete set of accounts, including balance sheets, is not a sufficient condition for
market producers to be treated as institutional
units such as quasi-corporations. Partnerships and
public producers, other than those included under
points (a), (b), (c) and (f) of paragraph 2.46 and sole
proprietorships — even if they keep a complete set
of accounts — are in general not distinct institutional units because they do not enjoy autonomy of
decision, their management being under the control of the households, non-profit institutions or
governments which own them.
2.49 Non-financial corporations include notional resident units which are treated as quasi-corporations.
2.50 The non-financial corporations sector is divided
into three subsectors:
(a) public non-financial corporations (S.11001);
(b) national private non-financial corporations
(S.11002);
(c) foreign controlled non-financial corporations
(S.11003).
Public non-financial corporations (S.11001)
2.51 Definition: the public non-financial corporations
subsector consists of all non-financial corporations, quasi-corporations and non-profit institutions, recognised as independent legal entities, that
are market producers and are subject to control by
government units.
2.52 Public quasi-corporations are quasi-corporations
owned directly by government units.
National private non-financial corporations
(S.11002)
2.53 Definition: the national private non-financial corporations subsector consists of all non-financial
corporations, quasi-corporations and non-profit
institutions which are recognised as independent
legal entities and which are market producers, that
are not controlled by government or by non-resident institutional units.
This subsector includes corporate and quasi-corporate direct foreign investment units not classified in the foreign controlled non-financial corporations subsector (S.11003).
Foreign controlled non-financial corporations
(S.11003)
2.54 Definition: the foreign controlled non-financial
corporations subsector consists of all non-financial
corporations and quasi-corporations that are controlled by non-resident institutional units.
This subsector includes:
(a) all subsidiaries of non-resident corporations;
(b) all corporations controlled by a non-resident
institutional unit that is not itself a corporation;
for example, a corporation which is controlled
by a foreign government. It includes corporations controlled by a group of non-resident
units acting in concert;
(c) all branches or other unincorporated agencies of non-resident corporations or unincorporated producers which are notional resident
units.
Financial corporations (S.12)
2.55 Definition: the financial corporations sector (S.12)
consists of institutional units which are independent legal entities and market producers, and whose
principal activity is the production of financial services. Such institutional units comprise all corporations and quasi-corporations which are principally engaged in:
(a) financial intermediation (financial intermediaries); and/or
2 Units and groupings of units
36 European system of accounts — ESA 2010
(b) auxiliary financial activities (financial
auxiliaries).
Also included are institutional units providing financial services, where most of either their
assets or their liabilities are not transacted on open
markets.
2.56 Financial intermediation is the activity in which
an institutional unit acquires financial assets and
incurs liabilities on its own account by engaging
in financial transactions on the market. The assets
and liabilities of financial intermediaries are transformed or repackaged in relation to, for example,
maturity, scale, risk, etc. in the financial intermediation process.
Auxiliary financial activities are activities related to
financial intermediation but which do not involve
financial intermediation themselves.
Financial intermediaries
2.57 The financial intermediation process channels
funds between third parties with a surplus and
those with a lack of funds. A financial intermediary
does not only act as an agent for other institutional
units, but places itself at risk by acquiring financial
assets and incurring liabilities on its own account.
2.58 In the financial intermediation process, all categories of liabilities may be involved with the exception of the liability category of other accounts payable (AF.8). The financial assets involved in the
financial intermediation process may be classified
in any category with the exception of the category
of insurance, pension and standardised guarantee
schemes (AF.6) but including the other accounts
receivable category. Financial intermediaries may
invest their funds in non-financial assets including real estate. In order to be considered a financial
intermediary, a corporation should incur liabilities on the market and transform funds. Real estate
corporations are not financial intermediaries.
2.59 The function of insurance corporations and pension funds consists of the pooling of risks. The liabilities of such institutions are insurance, pension
and standardised guarantee schemes (AF.6). The
counterparts of liabilities are investments by the
insurance corporations and pension funds, acting
as financial intermediaries.
2.60 Investment funds, hereinafter referred to as money
market funds (MMFs) and non-money market funds (non-MMFs), primarily incur liabilities through the issue of investment fund shares
or units (AF.52). They transform such funds
by acquiring financial assets and/or real estate.
Investment funds are classified as financial intermediaries. Any change in the value of their assets
and liabilities other than their own shares is
reflected in their own funds (see paragraph 7.07).
Given that the amount of own funds equals the
value of the investment fund’s shares or units, any
change in the value of the fund’s assets and liabilities will be reflected in the market value of such
shares or units. Investment funds investing in real
estate are financial intermediaries.
2.61 Financial intermediation is limited to acquiring
assets and incurring liabilities with the general
public or specified and relatively large sub-groups
thereof. Where the activity is limited to small
groups of persons or families, no financial intermediation takes place.
2.62 Exceptions to the general limitation of financial
intermediation to financial transactions on the
market may exist. Examples are municipal credit
and savings banks which rely on the municipality involved, or financial lease corporations
that depend on a parent group of companies for
acquiring funds or investing funds. Their lending or their acceptance of savings shall be independent of the municipality involved or the parent
group, respectively, in classifying them as financial
intermediaries.
Financial auxiliaries
2.63 Auxiliary financial activities comprise auxiliary activities for realising transactions in financial assets and liabilities or the transformation
or repackaging of funds. Financial auxiliaries do
not put themselves at risk by acquiring financial
assets or incurring liabilities. They facilitate financial intermediation. Head offices, all or most of the
subsidiaries of which are financial corporations,
are financial auxiliaries.
Units and groupings of units
 European system of accounts — ESA 2010 37
2
Financial corporations other than financial
intermediaries and financial auxiliaries
2.64 Other financial corporations other than financial
intermediaries and financial auxiliaries are institutional units providing financial services, where
most of either their assets or their liabilities are not
transacted on open markets.
Institutional units included in the financial
corporations sector
2.65 The institutional units included in the financial
corporations sector (S.12) are the following:
(a) private or public corporations which are principally engaged in financial intermediation
and/or in auxiliary financial activities;
(b) cooperatives and partnerships recognised as
independent legal entities which are principally
engaged in financial intermediation and/or in
auxiliary financial activities;
(c) public producers recognised as legal entities, which are principally engaged in financial intermediation and/or in auxiliary financial activities;
(d) non-profit institutions recognised as legal entities which are principally engaged in financial intermediation and/or in auxiliary financial activities, or which are serving financial
corporations;
(e) head offices when all or most of their subsidiaries are, as financial corporations, principally
engaged in financial intermediation and/or
financial auxiliary activities. These head offices
are classified as financial auxiliaries (S.126);
(f) holding companies, where the main role is the
holding of assets of a group of subsidiary corporations. The make-up of the group can be
financial or non-financial — this does not affect
the classification of holding companies as captive financial institutions (S.127);
(g) SPEs whose principal activity is the provision of
financial services;
(h) unincorporated investment funds comprising investment portfolios owned by the group
of participants, and whose management is
undertaken, in general, by other financial
corporations. Such funds are institutional
units, separate from the managing financial
corporation;
(i) unincorporated units principally engaged in
financial intermediation and subject to regulation and supervision (in most cases classified as
deposit-taking corporations except the central
bank, insurance corporations or pension funds)
are deemed to enjoy autonomy of decision and
to have autonomous management independent of their owners; their economic and financial behaviour is similar to that of financial corporations. In this case they are treated as separate institutional units. Examples are branches
of non-resident financial corporations.
Subsectors of financial corporations
2.66 The financial corporations sector is subdivided into
the following subsectors:
(a) central bank (S.121);
(b) deposit-taking corporations except the central
bank (S.122);
(c) money market funds (MMFs) (S.123);
(d) non-MMF investment funds (S.124);
(e) other financial intermediaries, except insurance corporations and pension funds (S.125);
(f) financial auxiliaries (S.126);
(g) captive financial institutions and money lenders (S.127);
(h) insurance corporations (S.128); and
(i) pension funds (S.129).
Combining subsectors of financial corporations
2.67 Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) as defined
by the ECB consist of all institutional units included
in the central bank (S.121), deposit-taking corporations except the central bank (S.122) and MMF
(S.123) subsectors.
2.68 Other monetary financial institutions consist of
those financial intermediaries through which the
2 Units and groupings of units
38 European system of accounts — ESA 2010
effects of the monetary policy of the central bank
(S.121) are transmitted to the other entities of the
economy. They are deposit-taking corporations
except the central bank (S.122) and MMF (S.123).
2.69 Financial intermediaries dealing with the pooling of risks are insurance corporations and pensions funds (ICPF). They consist of the insurance
corporations (S.128) and pension funds (S.129)
subsectors.
2.70 Financial corporations except MFI and ICPF consist of the non-MMF investment funds (S.124),
other financial intermediaries, except insurance
corporations and pension funds (S.125), financial
auxiliaries (S.126) and captive financial institutions
and money lenders (S.127) subsectors.
Subdividing subsectors of financial corporations
into public, national private and foreign controlled
financial corporations
2.71 With the exception of subsector S.121, each subsector is further subdivided into:
(a) public financial corporations;
(b) national private financial corporations; and
(c) foreign controlled financial corporations.
The criteria for this subdivision are the same as for
non-financial corporations (see paragraphs 2.51 to
2.54).
Table 2.3 — Financial corporations sector and its subsectors
Sectors and subsectors Public National
private
Foreign
controlled
Financial corporations S.12
Monetary financial
institutions (MFI)
Central bank S.121
Other monetary financial
institutions (OMFI)
Deposit-taking
corporations except the
central bank
S.122 S.12201 S.12202 S.12203
MMF S.123 S.12301 S.12302 S.12303
Financial corporations
except MFI and ICPF
Non-MMF investment funds S.124 S.12401 S.12402 S.12403
Other financial intermediaries, except insurance
corporations and pension funds S.125 S.12501 S.12502 S.12503
Financial auxiliaries S.126 S.12601 S.12602 S.12603
Captive financial institutions and money lenders S.127 S.12701 S.12702 S.12703
Insurance corporations
and pension funds (ICPFs)
Insurance corporations (IC) S.128 S.12801 S.12802 S.12803
Pension funds (PF) S.129 S.12901 S.12902 S.12903
Central bank (S.121)
2.72 Definition: the central bank subsector (S.121) consists of all financial corporations and quasi-corporations whose principal function is to issue currency, to maintain the internal and external value
of the currency and to hold all or part of the international reserves of the country.
2.73 The following financial intermediaries are classified in subsector S.121:
(a) the national central bank, including when it is
part of a European system of central banks;
(b) central monetary agencies of essentially public origin (e.g. agencies managing foreign
exchange or issuing currency) which keep a
complete set of accounts and enjoy autonomy
of decision in relation to central government.
When these activities are performed either
within central government or within the central bank, no separate institutional units exist.
2.74 Subsector S.121 does not include agencies and bodies, other than the central bank, which regulate or
supervise financial corporations or financial markets. They are classified in subsector S.126.
Units and groupings of units
 European system of accounts — ESA 2010 39
2
Deposit-taking corporations except the central bank
(S.122)
2.75 Definition: the deposit-taking corporations except
the central bank subsector (S.122) includes all
financial corporations and quasi-corporations,
except those classified in the central bank and in the
MMF subsectors, which are principally engaged in
financial intermediation and whose business is to
receive deposits and/or close substitutes for deposits
from institutional units, hence not only from MFIs,
and, for their own account, to grant loans and/or to
make investments in securities.
2.76 Deposit-taking corporations except the central bank cannot be described simply as ‘banks’,
because they may include some financial corporations which do not call themselves banks, or some
financial corporations which are not permitted to
do so in some countries, while some other financial corporations describing themselves as banks
may not in fact be deposit-taking corporations. The
following financial intermediaries are classified in
sub-sector S.122:
(a) commercial banks, ‘universal’ banks, ‘all-purpose’ banks;
(b) savings banks (including trustee savings banks
and savings banks and loan associations);
(c) post office giro institutions, post banks, giro
banks;
(d) rural credit banks, agricultural credit banks;
(e) cooperative credit banks, credit unions;
(f) specialised banks (e.g. merchant banks, issuing
houses, private banks); and
(g) electronic money institutions principally
engaged in financial intermediation.
2.77 The following financial intermediaries are classified in subsector S.122 where it is their business to
receive repayable funds from the public, whether
in the form of deposits or in other forms such as
the continuing issue of long-term debt securities:
(a) corporations engaged in granting mortgages
(including building societies, mortgage banks
and mortgage credit institutions);
(b) municipal credit institutions.
Otherwise, financial intermediaries are classified in
subsector S.124.
2.78 Subsector S.122 does not include:
(a) head offices which oversee and manage other
units of a group consisting predominantly of
deposit-taking corporations except the central
bank, but which are not deposit-taking corporations. Such head offices are classified in subsector S.126;
(b) non-profit institutions recognised as independent legal entities serving deposit-taking corporations, but not engaged in financial intermediation. They are classified in subsector S.126;
and
(c) electronic money institutions not principally
engaged in financial intermediation.
MMF (S.123)
2.79 Definition: the MMF subsector (S.123) consists of
all financial corporations and quasi-corporations,
except those classified in the central bank and in
the credit institutions subsectors, which are principally engaged in financial intermediation. Their
business is to issue investment fund shares or units
as close substitutes for deposits from institutional
units, and, for their own account, to make investments primarily in money market fund shares/
units, short-term debt securities, and/or deposits.
2.80 The following financial intermediaries are classified in subsector S.123: investment funds including investment trusts, unit trusts and other collective investment schemes whose shares or units are
close substitutes for deposits.
2.81 Subsector S.123 does not include:
(a) head offices which oversee and manage a group
consisting predominantly of MMFs, but which
are not MMFs themselves. They are classified in
subsector S.126;
(b) non-profit institutions recognised as independent legal entities serving MMFs, but not
engaged in financial intermediation. They are
classified in subsector S.126.
2 Units and groupings of units
40 European system of accounts — ESA 2010
Non-MMF investment funds (S.124)
2.82 Definition: the non-MMF investment funds subsector (S.124) consists of all collective investment
schemes, except those classified in the MMF subsector, which are principally engaged in financial
intermediation. Their business is to issue investment fund shares or units which are not close substitutes for deposits, and, on their own account,
to make investments primarily in financial assets
other than short-term financial assets and in nonfinancial assets (usually real estate).
2.83 Non-MMF investment funds cover investment
trusts, unit trusts and other collective investment
schemes whose investment fund shares or units are
not seen as close substitutes for deposits.
2.84 The following financial intermediaries are classified in subsector S.124:
(a) open-ended investment funds whose investment fund shares or units are, at the request of
the holders, repurchased or redeemed directly
or indirectly out of the undertaking’s assets;
(b) closed-ended investment funds with a fixed
share capital, where investors entering or leaving the fund must buy or sell existing shares;
(c) real estate investment funds;
(d) investment funds investing in other funds
(‘funds of funds’);
(e) hedge funds covering a range of collective
investment schemes, involving high minimum
investments, light regulation, and a range of
investment strategies.
2.85 Subsector S.124 does not include:
(a) pension funds which are part of the pension
funds subsector;
(b) special purpose government funds, called sovereign wealth funds. A special purpose government fund is classified as captive financial
institution if it is a financial corporation. The
classification of a ‘special purpose government
fund’ either as part of general government sector or as part of the financial corporation sector shall be determined according to the criteria
concerning special purpose units of general
government set out in paragraph 2.27;
(c) head offices which oversee and manage a group
consisting predominantly of non-MMF investment funds, but which are not investment
funds themselves. They are classified in subsector S.126;
(d) non-profit institutions recognised as independent legal entities serving non-MMF investment
funds, but not engaged in financial intermediation. They are classified in subsector S.126.
Other financial intermediaries, except insurance
corporations and pension funds (S.125)
2.86 Definition: the other financial intermediaries,
except insurance corporations and pension funds
subsector (S.125) consists of all financial corporations and quasi-corporations which are principally
engaged in financial intermediation by incurring
liabilities in forms other than currency, deposits,
or investment fund shares, or in relation to insurance, pension and standardised guarantee schemes
from institutional units.
2.87 Subsector S.125 includes financial intermediaries predominantly engaged in long-term financing. In most cases, this predominant maturity distinguishes that subsector from the OMFI subsectors (S.122 and S.123). Based on the non-existence
of liabilities in the form of investment fund shares
which are not seen as close substitutes for deposits or insurance, pension and standardised guarantee schemes, the borderline with the non-MMF
investment funds (S.124), the insurance corporations (S.128), and the pension funds (S.129) subsectors can be determined.
2.88 The other financial intermediaries, except insurance corporations and pension funds subsector
(S.125) is further subdivided into subsectors consisting of financial vehicle corporations engaged
in securitisation transactions (FVC), security and
derivative dealers, financial corporations engaged
in lending, and specialised financial corporations.
This is shown in Table 2.4.
Units and groupings of units
 European system of accounts — ESA 2010 41
2
Table 2.4 —Other financial intermediaries, except
insurance corporations and pension funds
subsector (S.125) and its subdivisions
Other financial intermediaries, except insurance
corporations and pension funds
Financial vehicle corporations engaged in securitisation
transactions (FVC);
Security and derivative dealers;
Financial corporations engaged in lending; and
Specialised financial corporations
2.89 Subsector S.125 does not include non-profit institutions recognised as independent legal entities
serving other financial intermediaries, but not
engaged in financial intermediation. They are classified in subsector S.126.
Financial vehicle corporations engaged in
securitisation transactions (FVC)
2.90 Definition: financial vehicle corporations engaged
in securitisation transactions (FVC) are undertakings carrying out securitisation transactions. FVC
that satisfy the criteria of an institutional unit are
classified in S.125, otherwise they are treated as an
integral part of the parent.
Security and derivative dealers, financial
corporations engaged in lending and specialised
financial corporations
2.91 Security and derivative dealers (on own account)
are financial intermediaries on own account.
2.92 Financial corporations engaged in lending include
for example financial intermediaries engaged in:
(a) financial leasing;
(b) hire purchase and the provision of personal or
commercial finance; or
(c) factoring.
2.93 Specialised financial corporations are financial
intermediaries, for example:
(a) venture and development capital companies;
(b) export/import financing companies; or
(c) financial intermediaries which acquire deposits
and/or close substitutes for deposits, or incur
loans vis-à-vis monetary financial institutions
only; these financial intermediaries cover also
central counterparty clearing houses (CCPs)
carrying out inter-MFI repurchase agreement
transactions.
2.94 Head offices which oversee and manage a group of
subsidiaries principally engaged in financial intermediation and/or in auxiliary financial activities
are classified in subsector S.126.
Financial auxiliaries (S.126)
2.95 Definition: the financial auxiliaries subsector
(S.126) consists of all financial corporations and
quasi-corporations which are principally engaged
in activities closely related to financial intermediation but which are not financial intermediaries
themselves.
2.96 The following financial corporations and quasicorporations are classified in subsector S.126:
(a) insurance brokers, salvage and average administrators, insurance and pension consultants,
etc.;
(b) loan brokers, securities brokers, investment
advisers, etc.;
(c) flotation corporations that manage the issue of
securities;
(d) corporations whose principal function is to
guarantee, by endorsement, bills and similar
instruments;
(e) corporations which arrange derivative and
hedging instruments, such as swaps, options
and futures (without issuing them);
(f) corporations providing infrastructure for
financial markets;
(g) central supervisory authorities of financial
intermediaries and financial markets when they
are separate institutional units;
(h) managers of pension funds, mutual funds, etc.;
(i) corporations providing stock exchange and
insurance exchange;
2 Units and groupings of units
42 European system of accounts — ESA 2010
(j) non-profit institutions recognised as independent legal entities serving financial corporations,
but not engaged in financial intermediation
(see point (d) of paragraph 2.46);
(k) payment institutions (facilitating payments
between buyer and seller).
2.97 Subsector S.126 also includes head offices whose
subsidiaries are all or mostly financial corporations.
Captive financial institutions and money lenders
(S.127)
2.98 Definition: the captive financial institutions and
money lenders subsector (S.127) consists of all
financial corporations and quasi-corporations
which are neither engaged in financial intermediation nor in providing financial auxiliary services,
and where most of either their assets or their liabilities are not transacted on open markets.
2.99 In particular, the following financial corporations
and quasi-corporations are classified in subsector
S.127:
(a) units as legal entities such as trusts, estates,
agencies accounts or ‘brass plate’ companies;
(b) holding companies that hold controlling-levels of equity of a group of subsidiary corporations and whose principal activity is owning
the group without providing any other service
to the businesses in which the equity is held,
that is, they do not administer or manage other
units;
(c) SPEs that qualify as institutional units and raise
funds in open markets to be used by their parent corporation;
(d) units which provide financial services exclusively with own funds, or funds provided by a
sponsor, to a range of clients and incur the financial risk of the debtor defaulting. Examples are
money lenders, corporations engaged in lending to students or for foreign trade from funds
received from a sponsor such as a government
unit or a non-profit institution, and pawnshops
that predominantly engage in lending;
(e) special purpose government funds, usually
called sovereign wealth funds, if classified as
financial corporations.
Insurance corporations (S.128)
2.100 Definition: the insurance corporations subsector
(S.128) consists of all financial corporations and
quasi-corporations which are principally engaged
in financial intermediation as a consequence of the
pooling of risks mainly in the form of direct insurance or reinsurance (see paragraph 2.59).
2.101 Insurance corporations provide services of:
(a) life and non-life insurance to individual units
or groups of units;
(b) reinsurance to other insurance corporations.
2.102 Services of non-life insurance corporations may
be provided in the form of insurance against the
following:
(a) fire (e.g. commercial and private property);
(b) liability (casualty);
(c) motor (own damage and third party liability);
(d) marine, aviation and transport (including
energy risks);
(e) accident and health; or
(f) financial insurance (provision of guarantees or
surety bonds).
Financial insurance or credit insurance corporations, also called guarantee banks, provide guarantees or surety bonds to back securitisation and
other credit products.
2.103 Insurance corporations are mainly incorporated
or mutual entities. Incorporated entities are owned
by shareholders and many are listed on stock
exchanges. Mutuals are owned by their policyholders and return their profits to the ‘with profits’ or
‘participating’ policyholders through dividends or
bonuses. ‘Captive’ insurers are normally owned by
a non-financial corporation and mostly insure the
risks of their shareholders.
Units and groupings of units
 European system of accounts — ESA 2010 43
2
Box 2.1 — Types of insurance
Type of insurance Sector/subsector
Direct insurance
Life insurance
Policyholder makes regular or one-off payments to an insurer in return for which
the insurer guarantees to provide the policyholder with an agreed sum, or an
annuity, at a given date or earlier.
Insurance corporations
Non-life insurance
Insurance to cover risks like accidents, sickness, fire, credit, etc. Insurance corporations
Reinsurance Insurance bought by an insurer to protect himself against an unexpectedly large
number of claims or exceptionally heavy claims. Insurance corporations
Social insurance
Social security
The participants are obliged by general
government to insure against certain social
risks.
Social security pensions
Social security funds Other social security
Employment related social insurance other
than social security
Employers can make it a condition of
employment that employees insure against
certain social risks.
Employment related pensions Sector of employer, insurance
corporations and pension
funds or non-profit institutions
serving households
Other employment related social
insurance
2.104 Subsector S.128 does not include:
(a) institutional units which fulfil each of the two
criteria listed in paragraph 2.117. They are classified in sub-sector S.1314;
(b) head offices which oversee and manage a group
consisting predominantly of insurance corporations, but which are not insurance corporations themselves. They are classified in sub-sector S.126;
(c) non-profit institutions recognised as independent legal entities serving insurance corporations, but not engaged in financial intermediation. They are classified in subsector S.126.
Pension funds (S.129)
2.105 Definition: the pension funds subsector (S.129)
consists of all financial corporations and quasi-corporations which are principally engaged in financial intermediation as the consequence of the pooling of social risks and needs of the insured persons
(social insurance). Pension funds as social insurance schemes provide income in retirement, and
often benefits for death and disability.
2.106 Subsector S.129 consists of only those social insurance pension funds that are institutional units separate from the units that create them. Such autonomous funds have autonomy of decision and keep
a complete set of accounts. Non-autonomous pension funds are not institutional units and remain
part of the institutional unit that sets them up.
2.107 Examples of participants in pension fund schemes
include employees of a single enterprise or a group
of enterprises, employees of a branch or industry,
and persons having the same profession. The benefits included in the insurance contract can be:
(a) paid after the death of the insured to the
widow(er) and children;
(b) paid after retirement; or
(c) paid after the insured becomes disabled.
2.108 In some countries, all those types of risks can be
insured by life insurance corporations as well as
through pension funds. In other countries, it is
required that some of those classes of risks are
insured through life insurance corporations. In
contrast to life insurance corporations, pension
funds are restricted by law to specified groups of
employees and self-employed.
2.109 Pension fund schemes may be organised by
employers or by general government. They may
also be organised by insurance corporations on
behalf of employees; or separate institutional units
may be established to hold and manage the assets
to be used to meet the pension entitlements and to
distribute the pensions.
2 Units and groupings of units
44 European system of accounts — ESA 2010
2.110 Subsector S.129 does not include:
(a) institutional units which fulfil each of the two
criteria listed in paragraph 2.117. They are classified in subsector S.1314;
(b) head offices which oversee and manage a group
consisting predominantly of pension funds, but
which are not pension funds themselves. They
are classified in subsector S.126;
(c) non-profit institutions recognised as independent legal entities serving pension funds, but not
engaged in financial intermediation. They are
classified in subsector S.126.
General government (S.13)
2.111 Definition: the general government sector (S.13)
consists of institutional units which are non-market producers whose output is intended for individual and collective consumption, and are financed
by compulsory payments made by units belonging
to other sectors, and institutional units principally
engaged in the redistribution of national income
and wealth.
2.112 The institutional units included in sector S.13 are
for example the following:
(a) general government units which exist through
a legal process to have judicial authority over
other units in the economic territory, and
administer and finance a group of activities, principally providing non-market goods
and services, intended for the benefit of the
community;
(b) a corporation or quasi-corporation which is a
government unit, if its output is mainly nonmarket and a government unit controls it;
(c) non-profit institutions recognised as independent legal entities which are non-market
producers and which are controlled by general
government;
(d) autonomous pension funds, where there is a
legal obligation to contribute, and where general government manages the funds with
respect to the settlement and approval of contributions and benefits.
2.113 The general government sector is divided into four
subsectors:
(a) central government (excluding social security
funds) (S.1311);
(b) state government (excluding social security
funds) (S.1312);
(c) local government (excluding social security
funds) (S.1313);
(d) social security funds (S.1314).
Central government (excluding social security funds)
(S.1311)
2.114 Definition: this subsector includes all administrative departments of the state and other central agencies whose competence extends normally
over the whole economic territory, except for the
administration of social security funds.
Included in subsector S.1311 are those non-profit
institutions which are controlled by central government and whose competence extends over the
whole economic territory.
Market regulatory organisations which are either
exclusively or principally distributors of subsidies
are classified in S.1311. Those organisations which
are exclusively or principally engaged in buying,
holding and selling agricultural or food products
are classified in S.11.
State government (excluding social security funds)
(S.1312)
2.115 Definition: this subsector consists of those types
of public administration which are separate institutional units exercising some of the functions of
government, except for the administration of social
security funds, at a level below that of central government and above that of the governmental institutional units existing at local level.
Included in subsector S.1312 are those non-profit
institutions which are controlled by state governments and whose competence is restricted to the
economic territories of the states.
Units and groupings of units
 European system of accounts — ESA 2010 45
2
Local government (excluding social security funds)
(S.1313)
2.116 Definition: this subsector includes those types of
public administration whose competence extends
to only a local part of the economic territory, apart
from local agencies of social security funds.
Included in subsector S.1313 are those non-profit
institutions which are controlled by local governments and whose competence is restricted to the
economic territories of the local governments.
Social security funds (S.1314)
2.117 Definition: the social security funds subsector
includes central, state and local institutional units
whose principal activity is to provide social benefits
and which fulfil each of the following two criteria:
(a) by law or by regulation certain groups of the
population are obliged to participate in the
scheme or to pay contributions; and
(b) general government is responsible for the management of the institution in respect of the settlement or approval of the contributions and
benefits independently from its role as supervisory body or employer.
There is usually no direct link between the amount
of the contribution paid by an individual and the
risk to which that individual is exposed.
Households (S.14)
2.118 Definition: the households sector (S.14) consists of
individuals or groups of individuals as consumers
and as entrepreneurs producing market goods and
non-financial and financial services (market producers) provided that the production of goods and
services is not by separate entities treated as quasicorporations. It also includes individuals or groups
of individuals as producers of goods and nonfinancial services for exclusively own final use.
Households as consumers may be defined as
small groups of persons who share the same living accommodation, who pool their income and
wealth and who consume certain types of goods
and services collectively, mainly housing and food.
The principal resources of households are the
following:
(a) the compensation of employees;
(b) property income;
(c) transfers from other sectors;
(d) receipts from the disposal of market products;
and
(e) imputed receipts from the output of products
for own final consumption.
2.119 The households sector includes:
(a) individuals or groups of individuals whose
principal function is consumption;
(b) persons living permanently in institutions who
have little or no autonomy of action or decision in economic matters (e.g. members of religious orders living in monasteries, long-term
patients in hospitals, prisoners serving long
sentences, old persons living permanently in
retirement homes). Such people are treated as
a single institutional unit: a single household;
(c) individuals or groups of individuals whose
principal function is consumption and that
produce goods and non-financial services for
exclusively own final use; only two categories
of services produced for own final consumption are included within the system: services of
owner-occupied dwellings and domestic services produced by paid employees;
(d) sole proprietorships and partnerships without
legal status, other than those treated as quasicorporations, and which are market producers;
and
(e) non-profit institutions serving households,
which do not have independent legal status,
or those which do but which are of only minor
importance.
2.120 In the ESA 2010, the households sector is subdivided into the following subsectors:
(a) employers (S.141) and own-account workers
(S.142);
(b) employees (S.143);
2 Units and groupings of units
46 European system of accounts — ESA 2010
(c) recipients of property income (S.1441);
(d) recipients of pensions (S.1442);
(e) recipients of other transfers (S.1443).
2.121 Households are allocated to subsectors according
to the largest income category (employers’ income,
compensation of employees, etc.) of the household as a whole. When more than one income of a
given category is received within the same household, the classification is based on the total household income within each category.
Employers and own-account workers (S.141 and
S.142)
2.122 Definition: the employers and own-account workers subsector consists of the group of households
for which the (mixed) incomes (B.3) accruing to
the owners of household unincorporated enterprises from their activity as producers of market
goods and services with or without paid employees
are the largest source of income for the household
as a whole, even if it does not account for more
than half of total household income.
Employees (S.143)
2.123 Definition: the employees subsector consists of the
group of households for which the income accruing from compensation of employees (D.1) is the
largest source of income for the household as a
whole.
Recipients of property income (S.1441)
2.124 Definition: the recipients of property income subsector consists of the group of households for
which property income (D.4) is the largest source
of income for the household as a whole.
Recipients of pensions (S.1442)
2.125 Definition: the recipients of pensions subsector consists of the group of households for which
the income accruing from pensions is the largest
source of income for the household as a whole.
Pension households are households whose largest source of income consists of retirement or
other pensions, including pensions from previous
employers.
Recipients of other transfers (S.1443)
2.126 Definition: the recipients of other transfers subsector consists of the group of households for which
the income accruing from other current transfers
is the largest source of income for the household as
a whole.
Other current transfers are all current transfers
other than property income, pensions and income
of persons living permanently in institutions.
2.127 If information on the relative contributions of the
sources of income of the household as a whole is
not available for sectoring purposes, the income
of the reference person is used for classifying purposes. The reference person of a household is the
person with the largest income. If the latter information is not available, the income of the person
who states that he/she is the reference person is
used for subsectoring households.
2.128 Other criteria for subsectoring households can be
used, e.g. breakdown of households as entrepreneurs by activity: agricultural households and nonagricultural households.
Non-profit institutions serving households
(S.15)
2.129 Definition: the non-profit institutions serving
households (NPISHs) sector (S.15) consists of nonprofit institutions which are separate legal entities, which serve households and which are private
non-market producers. Their principal resources
are voluntary contributions in cash or in kind from
households in their capacity as consumers, from
payments made by general government and from
property income.
2.130 Where such institutions are not very important,
they are not included in the NPISH sector, but in
the households sector (S.14), as their transactions
are indistinguishable from units in that sector.
Non-market NPISHs controlled by general government are classified in the general government
sector (S.13).
Units and groupings of units
 European system of accounts — ESA 2010 47
2
The NPISHs sector includes the following main
kinds of NPISHs that provide non-market goods
and services to households:
(a) trade unions, professional or learned societies, consumers’ associations, political parties,
churches or religious societies (including those
financed but not controlled by governments),
and social, cultural, recreational and sports
clubs; and
(b) charities, relief and aid organisations financed
by voluntary transfers in cash or in kind from
other institutional units.
Sector S.15 includes charities, relief or aid agencies serving non-resident units and excludes entities where membership gives a right to a predetermined set of goods and services.
Rest of the world (S.2)
2.131 Definition: the rest of the world sector (S.2) is a
grouping of units without any characteristic functions and resources; it consists of non-resident
units insofar as they are engaged in transactions
with resident institutional units, or have other economic links with resident units. Its accounts provide an overall view of the economic relationships
linking the national economy with the rest of the
world. The institutions of the EU and international
organisations are included.
2.132 The rest of the world is not a sector for which complete sets of accounts have to be kept, but it is convenient to treat the rest of the world as a sector.
Sectors are obtained by disaggregating the total
economy to obtain more homogeneous groups of
resident institutional units, which are similar in
respect to their economic behaviour, objectives
and functions. This is not the case for the rest of
the world sector: for this sector, there are recorded
the transactions and other flows of non-financial
and financial corporations, non-profit institutions,
households and general government with non-resident institutional units and other economic relationships between residents and non-residents, e.g.
claims by residents on non-residents.
2.133 The accounts for the rest of the world include
only transactions carried out between resident
institutional units and non-resident units, subject
to the following exceptions:
(a) the services of transport (up to the border of the
exporting country) provided by resident units
in respect of imported goods are shown in the
rest of the world accounts with FOB imports,
even though they are produced by resident
units;
(b) transactions in foreign assets between residents
belonging to different sectors in the domestic economy are shown in the detailed financial accounts for the rest of the world. These
transactions do not affect the country’s financial position vis-à-vis the rest of the world; they
affect the financial relationships of individual
sectors with the rest of the world;
(c) transactions in the country’s liabilities between
non-residents belonging to different geographical zones are shown in the geographical
breakdown of the rest of the world accounts.
Although these transactions do not affect the
country’s overall liability to the rest of the
world, they affect its liabilities to different parts
of the world.
2.134 The rest of the world sector (S.2) is subdivided into:
(a) Member States and institutions and bodies of
the European Union (S.21):
(1) Member States of the European Union (S.211);
(2) Institutions and bodies of the European Union
(S.212);
(b) non-member countries and international
organisations non-resident of EU (S.22).
Sector classification of producer units for
main standard legal forms of ownership
2.135 The following overview and paragraphs 2.31 to 2.44
summarise the principles underlying the classification of producer units into sectors, using the standard terminology for describing the main types of
institutions.
2.136 Private and public corporations which are market
producers are classified as follows:
2 Units and groupings of units
48 European system of accounts — ESA 2010
(a) those principally engaged in the production of
goods and non-financial services: in sector S.11
(non-financial corporations);
(b) those principally engaged in financial intermediation and auxiliary financial activities: in sector S.12 (financial corporations).
2.137 Cooperatives and partnerships which are recognised as independent legal entities and are market
producers are classified as follows:
(a) those principally engaged in the production of
goods and non-financial services: in sector S.11
(non-financial corporations);
(b) those principally engaged in financial intermediation and auxiliary financial activities: in sector S.12 (financial corporations).
2.138 Public producers which by virtue of special legislation are recognised as independent legal entities
and which are market producers are classified as
follows:
(a) those principally engaged in the production of
goods and non-financial services: in sector S.11
(non-financial corporations);
(b) those principally engaged in financial intermediation and auxiliary financial activities: in sector S.12 (financial corporations).
2.139 Public producers which are not recognised as independent legal entities and are market producers are
classified as follows:
(a) If they are quasi-corporations:
(1) those principally engaged in the production of
goods and non-financial services: in sector S.11
(non-financial corporations);
(2) those principally engaged in financial intermediation and financial auxiliary activities: in sector S.12
(financial corporations).
(b) If they are not quasi-corporations: in sector
S.13 (general government), as they remain an
integral part of the units which control them.
2.140 Non-profit institutions (associations and foundations) recognised as independent legal entities are
classified as follows:
(a) those which are market producers and principally engaged in the production of goods and
non-financial services: in sector S.11 (nonfinancial corporations);
(b) those principally engaged in financial intermediation and auxiliary financial activities: in sector S.12 (financial corporations);
(c) those which are non-market producers:
(1) in sector S.13 (general government), if they are public producers controlled by general government;
(2) in sector S.15 (non-profit institutions serving
households), if they are private producers.
2.141 Sole proprietorships and partnerships which are
not recognised as independent legal entities and
are market producers are classified as follows:
(a) If they are quasi-corporations:
(1) those principally engaged in the production of
goods and non-financial services: in sector S.11
(non-financial corporations);
(2) those principally engaged in financial intermediation and financial auxiliary activities: in sector S.12
(financial corporations).
(b) If they are not quasi-corporations, they are
classified in sector S.14 (households).
2.142 Head offices are classified as follows:
(a) in sector S.11 (non-financial corporations), if
the preponderant type of activity of the group
of corporations which are market producers as
a whole is the production of goods and nonfinancial services (see point (e) of paragraph
2.46);
(b) in sector S.12 (financial corporations), if the
preponderant type of activity of the group of
corporations as a whole is financial intermediation (see point (e) of paragraph 2.65).
Holding companies which are holders of assets
of a group of subsidiary corporations are always
treated as financial corporations. Holding companies hold the assets of a group of companies, but
do not undertake any management activities with
respect to the group.
2.143 Table 2.5 shows in schematic form the various
cases enumerated above.
Units and groupings of units
 European system of accounts — ESA 2010 49
2
Table 2.5 — Sector classification of producer units for main standard legal forms of ownership
Type of producer
Standard legal description
Market producers
(goods and nonfinancial services)
Market producers
(financial
intermediation)
Non-market producers
Public
producers
Private
producers
Private and public corporations S.11 non-financial
corporations
S.12 financial
corporations
Cooperatives and partnerships recognised as
independent legal entities
S.11 non-financial
corporations
S.12 financial
corporations
Public producers which by virtue of special
legislation are recognised as independent legal
entities
S.11 non-financial
corporations
S.12 financial
corporations
Public producers not
recognised as independent
legal entities
Those with the
characteristics of
quasi-corporations
S.11 non-financial
corporations
S.12 financial
corporations
The rest S.13 general
government
Non-profit institutions recognised as
independent legal entities
S.11 non-financial
corporations
S.12 financial
corporations
S.13 general
government
S.15 non-profit
institutions serving
households
Partnerships not recognised
as independent legal
entities
Sole proprietorships
Those with the
characteristics of
quasi-corporations
S.11 non-financial
corporations
S.12 financial
corporations
The rest S.14 households S.14 households
Head offices whose
preponderant type of
activity of the group of
corporations controlled by
them is the production of:
goods and nonfinancial services
S.11 non-financial
corporations
financial services S.12 financial
corporations
Local kind-of-activity units and
industries
2.144 Most institutional units producing goods and services are engaged in a combination of activities at
the same time. They may be engaged in a principal
activity, some secondary activities and some ancillary activities.
2.145 An activity occurs when resources such as equipment, labour, manufacturing techniques, information networks or products are combined, leading to the creation of specific goods or services. An
activity is characterised by an input of products, a
production process and an output of products.
Activities can be determined by reference to a specific level of NACE Rev. 2.
2.146 If a unit carries out more than one activity, all the
activities which are not ancillary activities (see
Chapter  3, paragraph 3.12) are ranked according
to the gross value added. On the basis of the preponderant gross value added generated, a distinction can then be made between principal activity
and secondary activities.
2.147 In order to analyse flows occurring in the process
of production and in the use of goods and services,
it is necessary to choose units which emphasise
relationships of a technico-economic kind. This
requirement means that institutional units must
be partitioned into smaller and more homogeneous units with regard to the kind of production.
Local kind-of-activity units are intended to meet
this requirement as an operational approach.
The local kind-of-activity unit
2.148 Definition: the local kind-of-activity unit (local
KAU) is the part of a kind-of-activity unit (KAU)
2 Units and groupings of units
50 European system of accounts — ESA 2010
which corresponds to a local unit. The local KAU
is called establishment in the 2008 SNA and ISIC
Rev. 4. A KAU groups all the parts of an institutional unit in its capacity as producer contributing
to the performance of an activity at class level (four
digits) of the NACE Rev. 2 and corresponds to
one or more operational subdivisions of the institutional unit. The institutional unit’s information
system must be capable of indicating or calculating for each local KAU at least the value of production, intermediate consumption, compensation of
employees, the operating surplus and employment
and gross fixed capital formation.
The local unit is an institutional unit, or part of an
institutional unit, producing goods or services situated in a geographically identified place.
A local KAU may correspond to an institutional
unit as producer; on the other hand, it can never
belong to two different institutional units.
2.149 If an institutional unit producing goods or services
contains a principal activity and also one or several secondary activities, it is subdivided into the
same number of KAUs, and the secondary activities are classified under different headings from the
principal activity. The ancillary activities are not
separated from the principal or secondary activities. But KAUs falling within a particular heading
of the classification system can produce products
outside the homogeneous group on account of secondary activities connected with them which cannot be separately identified from available accounting documents. Thus a KAU may carry out one or
more secondary activities.
Industries
2.150 Definition: an industry consists of a group of local
KAUs engaged in the same, or similar, kind-ofactivity. At the most detailed level of classification,
an industry consists of all the local KAUs falling
within a single class (four digits) of NACE Rev. 2
and which are therefore engaged in the same activity as defined in the NACE Rev. 2.
Industries comprise both local KAUs producing
market goods and services and local KAUs producing non-market goods and services. An industry by definition consists of a group of local KAUs
engaged in the same type of productive activity,
irrespective of whether or not the institutional
units to which they belong produce market or nonmarket output.
2.151 Industries are classified in three categories:
(a) industries producing market goods and services (market industries) and goods and services for own final use. Services for own final
use are housing services produced by owneroccupiers, and domestic services produced by
employing paid staff;
(b) industries producing non-market goods and
services of general government: non-market
industries of general government;
(c) industries producing non-market goods and
services of non-profit institutions serving
households: non-market industries of nonprofit institutions serving households.
Classification of industries
2.152 The classification used for grouping local KAUs
into industries is the NACE Rev. 2.
Units of homogeneous production and
homogeneous branches
2.153 For analysis of the production process, the unit
best suited to this analysis is the unit of homogeneous production. This unit has a unique activity
defined by its inputs, process of production, and
outputs.
The unit of homogeneous production
2.154 Definition: a unit of homogeneous production carries out a unique activity which is identified by
its inputs, process of production, and its outputs.
The products which constitute the inputs and outputs are themselves distinguished by their physical characteristics, the extent to which they are
processed and the technique of production used.
They can be identified by a classification of products (classification of products by activity — CPA).
The CPA is a product classification the elements of
which are structured according to the industrial
Units and groupings of units
 European system of accounts — ESA 2010 51
2
origin criterion, industrial origin being defined by
NACE Rev. 2.
The homogeneous branch
2.155 Definition: the homogeneous branch consists
of a grouping of units of homogeneous production. The set of activities covered by a homogeneous branch is identified by reference to a product
classification. The homogeneous branch produces
those goods or services specified in the classification and only those products.
2.156 Homogeneous branches are units designed for economic analysis. Units of homogeneous production
cannot usually be observed directly; data collected
from the units used in statistical enquiries have to
be re-arranged to form homogeneous branches.